Digitizing the physical world is
probably one of the most exciting things
about the physical world. 85% of our GDP
is physical industry. At the end of the
day, we have to build things.
>> You became a key leader at Whimo. What
was that like?
>> The fundamental challenge of autonomous
driving. You can't ship until you're
really almost perfect. Statistically,
it's five times safer than a human.
>> You decide to move into construction.
Glad you found bedrock. There's
something like $120 billion of
excavation contracts per year in the US.
You can capture incredible signals and
actually kind of do pretty magical
things. The machine becomes autonomously
capable. It's just a physical
manifestation of the AI wave. A lot of
people aren't going to understand that.
They assume you're just destroying jobs.
How do you think about it?
>> You can't hold this back. At the end of
the day, there's an inevitability to it
and the entire country will benefit from
it.
CEO and Cole Brown
[Music]
here.
>> Boris Soffman lives at the cutting edge
of AI in the real world. He was a PhD in
robotics at Carnegie Melon with some of
the top roboticists in our country. He
built a robotics consumer company. A lot
of really cool popular toys and it was
bought by Google at Whimo. He helped
develop some of the most important
systems for self-driving for trucks and
otherwise. After Whimo, he's left and
he's now revolutionizing another
industry which is construction.
Construction is one of the largest
industries in our country. It affects
the cost of pretty much everything.
Boris is taking some key lessons from
Whimo and applying it to the
construction industry. Most people have
no idea how much there is to gain in
construction. There's so many projects
that are not quite affordable that we
wish we could do. There's so many things
that are broken with infrastructure and
with our buildings. There's so many
things that cost so much more than they
should. So, there's just going to be
this huge argument in our country from
the lites against the AI. But talking to
Boris, it's fascinating what's coming
and how positive it is for our
civilization. Excited for you to meet
him.
>> Boris, thank you for joining us.
>> Yeah, thank you Joe. My pleasure. Really
excited to be here.
>> Bedrock, of course, is a very exciting
company we're going to talk about that's
just doing new things with autonomy and
construction. is going to change a lot
of possibilities in America. Uh it's a
big week for you. You guys have a big
launch going on as as we're releasing
this, but let's talk about your
background a little bit more before we
go into real world and AI. Tell us about
you. You're a PhD in robotics at
Carnegie Melon. Is that right?
>> That's right. Yep. Uh uh was in Carnegie
Melon both undergrad stayed for PhD
focused on autonomous driving where that
was kind of an epicenter of a lot of
that early research and um that was the
you know the type of work that really
kind of got me into robotics. It was uh
it was um one of the holy grails of the
entire space.
>> What was going on in Carnegie Melon when
you were there? What kind of robotics
were?
>> So what's interesting is that at that
point um nobody could imagine how
aggressively would get pushed to
commercialization. At that point it was
uh you know the robotics institute
existed since I think the early 90s. It
was the only university that really
invested in that that degree. It was a
lot of work funded by NASA by DARPA. um
uh caterpillar and deer were actually
starting to fund a little bit of kind of
more uh kind of industrial applications,
but it was a lot of like applied
research for autonomous driving. So,
navigating on-road, off-road, um
starting to develop the beginnings of
perception systems, path planning
systems, being able to ship this onto
large scale mobile robots and actually
try to drive intelligently. And a lot of
the um people around that time ended up
being the seeds uh that then propagated
to all the Grand Challenge, Urban
Challenge, and then Whimo, Aurora, Uber,
ATG. It was this really fascinating
pocket of talent actually.
>> Yeah, a lot of great talent came out of
there. And going back further, your your
your dad's a scientist, right? You come
from from a little bit of that
background yourself.
>> Yeah. So, we um uh I was actually born
in the Soviet Union, immigrated uh when
I was pretty young. I was about 6 years
old when we left. Uh came into the US um
through New York, ended up in Texas. My
dad was a mathematician uh and uh worked
in uh telecommunications industry and uh
for a long time on kind of optimization
of cell phone networks and data flow and
uh uh I've always been excited about
engineering, math, science um and then
really really got into AI uh just being
around it so deeply at Carnegie Melon.
>> And did did coming from the Soviet Union
to America give you an appreciation for
for business and freedom and building
things at all? Yeah, it's it's
interesting that not not even to the
probably like talking to my parents, the
things that they went through uh is hard
to even imagine. and I try to uh grasp
it, but they've been trying to leave for
about 15 years before they were finally
able to uh and were really deeply
involved in even kind of helping
organize the first kind of batch of
immigrants that were able to leave uh
legally in a deal between the Reagan
administration and Gorbachev
administration and and then we
immigrated and it was um uh you know it
was like a very you leave everything and
uh start from scratch and actually it
was kind of interesting like last year I
hit the age that my dad was when he left
uh the country barely spoke like a tiny
bit of English, zero assets, left every
asset he had, had a six-year-old, me and
my sister was one month old, and it was
like a fresh start. And so kind of hit
me hard. I'm trying to imagine what that
would feel like. And it's really hard to
put yourself in those shoes
>> just to totally start over. Wow. Amazing
what he's been able to do for his kids
and what you guys have been able to to
do here. You've built multiple
companies, of course, after your PhD,
you started something called Ani. Tell
us about that.
>> That's right. Uh so was a a consumer
robotics company. who were using um
really some of the most kind of novel
and innovative um technologies in
robotics, AI, computer vision um and
trying to create very interactive uh and
uh entertaining consumer products. So
toys and games and uh um and we were
able to use both um really novel kind of
technologies on the software side uh and
leverage the smartphone industry
actually on all the components that were
dropping in price uh and pushing a lot
of complexity to software. So, we made
um really interactive high-end uh games
and toys that were uh super popular.
They were like number one selling
products for, you know, certain years
and or some of the coolest for like
almost like a Pixar character coming to
life in the in the real world.
>> And so, you had these really popular
consumer robots. It was working pretty
well, though. I remember I guess it's a
tough business to sell almost all of
your stuff in the Q4 Christmas totally
didn't appreciate how bad that would be.
It's like it's you almost have to have a
little bit of ignorance going into some
of these industries to um you know and
then you kind of tackle the problems.
But yeah, we were like it was the most
seasonal business I've ever heard of
still. It was 85% Q4 and we were like
>> wow
>> kind of close to 100 million in revenue
and so your cash flows are spiking up
and down like crazy and you're locking
in forecasts and end of the summer uh
for what you think is going to be the
demand.
>> Inventory doesn't go quite as well.
You're in big trouble basically every
year.
>> Totally. And and every year you're over
under. You never get it right. And so
you're like uh either like I remember
one year we were the number one selling
product on eBay and the the $150 product
was going for a thousand on eBay and
then another year you're like massively
over built and then you're like figuring
out how to do promotions and and get it
out. So it's that's about as hard as it
gets uh in terms of a kind of a business
flow.
>> That's a tough one. You sold Ani to
Google and you went there and you became
you became a key leader at Whimo which
everyone knows now. We see him driving
all around our cities. What was that
like? Yeah, that's right. So, they
pulled us in where like a lot of the
team um uh the the core of like our
company was basically like the you know
these types of backgrounds that were um
you know from perception planning
robotics like uh kind of autonomy
electronics and so we basically became
the um trucking team and so I was like
leading autonomous trucking there um and
bringing up a second application. At the
same time, um, I led a handful of the
technical verticals like the overall
perception team, um, where we helped
launch the Jaguars into San Francisco.
Um, uh, and, um, uh, and then, uh, we
also eventually led reliability and
freeway driving. We launched driverless
on freeways. And, uh, it was pretty
amazing. It was like this, um, you know,
autonomous driving went for probably
like a 12 years where it was hype, but
then it wasn't quite there. And it was
this like endless R&D where it felt like
it was getting closer, but not quite
there yet. Everyone thinks of Google as
being like too cautious, but I guess
like you have to be cautious on this
thing. You're not allowed to release. It
doesn't work, I guess.
>> No, this is so this is Yeah, exactly.
This is one of those where uh oftentimes
you think of like AI or products where
it's like, yeah, get it out there and
iterate. Uh um this is one of those
where you're optimizing for the worst
case, not the average case. This isn't
search where you give some bogus result
like you could kill somebody. And uh
>> Elon maybe iterates fast and public with
XAI. We had to do some some interesting
things recently, but it's like but it's
like at least that's an
>> eventful few days.
>> Very eventful, but it's not I guess
Whimo is like much more and what years
were you there? I remember I remember
before you answer I remember I would
like drive by Google and Mountain View
on the 101 maybe a decade ago and
there'd be these cars with these things
on them
>> and and I'm like this super obnoxious,
you know, young guy at that younger guy
at that time. So I'd like see test it
and see like if I could get it to like
break quickly like with no one else
around. I wasn't trying to cause any
damage. It is the worst we've seen.
Yeah,
>> I know. I'm sure you've seen much worse
than me, but you're kind you're curious
as a driver like how will this react?
And it was 10 years ago. When was it?
>> Yeah. So, it's 2019 uh summer through um
uh spring of 2024, so about 5 years. Uh,
and it was like a really cool phase
because it went from that like kind of
really aggressive R&D point to where
that launch in San Francisco was the
beginning of this incredible hockey
stick that uh uh is like actually the
beginnings of like real scaled
commercialization for autonomous
driving. And uh and there's a couple
things were amazing about it where one
there was a real aggressive
transformation of technology stack to
kind of embrace these very machine
learning kind of new age of machine
learning and kind of datadriven
approaches. uh uh particularly on the
behavioral side where you're learning
from large scale data instead of
engineering a system with huristics and
search and so forth.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I remember I was talking to
Elon about this. It was maybe late last
year when he said that like everything
had been redone by the AI like it just
got rid of all the heristics because
because it was safer and better just
itself, right?
>> Yeah. It's one of those so and there's a
couple of properties there where you
know for Whimo it's it's an interesting
kind of a hybrid because at the end of
the day um some layers of um structured
heristics are actually helpful because
of longtail safety challenges where you
have some guarantees that no matter what
happens you're kind of like you have
some some guardrails but the way to
solve the mass of the problem has to be
ML. It just doesn't work any other way
because without it you have such a
brittle system that is engineered and
you run into a problem. You can go and
solve it but you'll create five other
ones in this infinite space and the
further you go the more complex the
system becomes. ML is the inverse where
the further you go the better competency
you've gathered. Uh and you end up uh um
using data to explain whatever gaps you
have and those gaps are less and less
the further you go. And so the system
from San Francisco generalized really
well to Los Angeles and Phoenix and
Austin and um and even from car to truck
where we unified the tech stacks and um
that jumped to a 80,000 lb big rig um
you're basically again using data to
explain how the dynamics are different
and so 10 to 15% more data often times
we get the models to driverless level
quality um and um you uh uh you end up
getting this kind of like flywheel in
that subsidy. When you say that quality,
does that quality mean you have to be
like 10 times safer than the human
driver? Like how do you how do you
quantify what's safe enough to put on
the road?
>> Yeah. So Whimo um uh had an inc and
still has an incredible safety culture
where um you know today like there's
over 70 million miles and statistically
it's five times safer than a human. It's
like genuinely uh like it is saving
lives from a on a from a statistical
basis.
>> So if there'd be 20 deaths on average in
those miles, now there's four deaths.
>> Yeah. And I mean and there's been zero
like really significant accidents.
Almost every accident that actually has
happened has been um you can kind of
they they've released safety reports
where it's actually human caused by you
know
>> it's probably some jerk like me trying
with the way it was going to do.
>> Oh it's not the world. I mean there's
like people that were jumping on the
front hoods of the car. It's like uh
it's we actually had a rate on it. Uh
it's a uh we you know it would happen in
like different rates of different cities
and so you can like uh you know you can
like estimate how civil a city is by how
often people jump on the front hood of
your car.
>> Oh that's funny. Quantify quantifiating
could be a very dangerous politically
incorrect issue if you start to quantify
it too much. Let's be careful. It's a
rating but uh
>> going back to the AI here.
No, but it's a but the the system like
it actually then works and you um uh you
start to really think about it not in
terms of geographies, not in terms of
anything else, but like what are the
like gaps or companies they need they
need to add on and when you expand to
new cities the burden kind of shifts
more towards the operations and qual
qualifying the system and there's always
like little things that you learn but um
that flywheel is just working incredibly
well where you've seen that exponential
growth. So, I want to push back on one
thing you said on this before we move on
because I think it relates to some of
your new challenges. You said you just
have to add a little bit more data and
adjust it for a truck.
>> A lot more data sometimes.
>> Well, sorry, but a lot more data
adjusted for a truck. But like for me,
just intuitively like the way you safely
drive like a really large truck, it's
going to have different braking ability.
It's going to it's going to have to stay
farther away. It's going to just just
it's just like much scarier to me as a
human like thinking about trying to
maneuver a giant truck. But you're
saying the data still like really
applies.
>> So, highways in general. So this was a
big aspect of our focus over the last
few years just kind of unifying the car
and truck stack. But highways in general
have a pretty gigantic extra complexity
where you can never stop like you just
can't stop in the middle of the road
like you can you know on a 20 mph
street. And so you have extreme
reliability challenges and you have a
really difficult sparity of um the
events that you see on a highway. And so
um the foundations of how you drive that
that holds like you can carry over and
really learn and you start thinking
about how you uh uh you know how you
interpret the environment, how you
detect vehicles, how you think about
lane changes and so forth. But the long
tail becomes really really challenging.
Uh and it's actually both cars and
trucks where you're dealing with you
know events that happen once every many
mill millions of miles. And so the
fundamental challenge of autonomous
driving, which is why it took so long
and so many billions of dollars, is that
you can't ship until you're really
almost perfect, like not not perfect,
but you're really beyond a human
relative safety, and you have to solve
every one of those types of flavors of
challenges. Um, and so there is no
traditional kind of startup release
process where you get something out,
it's imperfect, but pretty decent, and
then you kind of keep improving. Yeah,
you really have to be able to handle
everything that San Francisco can throw
at you or highway can throw at you
before you can launch. And so even
though the ML systems fundamentally do
carry that property that things carry
over, the cost of actually shipping a
system is astronomical. Um, including
redesigning the platform itself.
>> Yep. That makes sense. Well, let's let's
shift. So So you guys a lot of the top
talent in the world obviously crushed
these problems at Whimo. It's it's
everyone's seeing what it's starting to
do now. It's amazing. and you decided to
move into construction and starting
starting with excavators for the real
world like like so how did you make that
shift? Why why did you found bedrock?
Yeah. So we so part of it was really um
appreciating how incredible those
scalability capabilities we just talked
about were um where you start with a
beach head in Whimo's case was San
Francisco and now you have this fly
where you're adding new capabilities,
new geographies, new platforms and
setting aside the complexity of the
public road driving domain. The
generalization actually like really
really works well. Um we saw an
opportunity to apply that to a space
that never had that type of uh approach
uh in it which is uh automation of
specialized heavy machinery and
construction was a especially exciting
uh place to start where you have um
large numbers of machine types. They're
all in these slowmoving semic-controlled
environments. Uh you have astronomical
amounts of of work that needs to be
done. you have an industry that um
fundamentally has these astronomical
tailwinds where um manufacturing has to
be like built at massive scale. Uh you
have um you know re onshoring of of
manufacturing reindustrialization
infrastructure is going through a
refresh cycle where you have to re
repave giant amounts of roads. You have
housing shortages. You have energy. So
you have these huge demands. At the same
time labor's going the opposite
direction where um you're seeing the
average age go above 50. um the uh uh up
to 40% of of construction workers are
retiring in the next 10 years. And so
you have this like crisis level um pain
in this industry that's like about
double digit percentages of our GDP. Um
and it's a perfect problem for autonomy
to help um you know really diffuse some
of these kind of constraints that are
holding it back. And it's genuinely
supply constrained. Um and it has this
very similar properties where you have a
lot of um uh different types of machines
doing very diverse types of work but you
have pockets of incredible volume of of
work that needs to be done that is
incredibly well suited for uh learning
and automation.
>> A lot of it's very repeatable I guess.
So it seems like in some places it's
easier and in some places it's harder.
Right. So, the thing that seems maybe
easier to me is you're not driving with
like tons of other cars around. It's
safety still a problem, but it seems
like maybe not as you can iterate a lot
more of something by itself practicing.
So, it's like probably easier and
cheaper to iterate and learn. One thing
that seems a lot
>> harder to me is you're like moving on
very uneven ground and weird hills and
things which you don't encounter. And
then you also have like an excavator
where like maybe in some cases it hits
dirt, some cases hits rock, some cases
it hits something, it slips, everything
moves. Like so you have to like model
all sorts of different things here.
Yeah, there's some gives and takes. So
on the easier side, these are actually
very very significant where uh you can't
launch a robo taxi as a legitimate
product until you solve 100% of San
Francisco. We can actually be very
surgical on the product kind of
categories and mixes of machines and
capabilities and become incredibly
competent at certain type of work. For
example, heavy earth work for an
excavator. And that has astronomical
amounts of value. It's one of the most
capable machines, one of the highest uh
volume machines and highest utilized.
And it's the hardest to learn. And
there's jobs where that's all they do
for a year. Uh moving gigantic
>> for a year just moving things
>> setting a foundation of a factory.
Right.
>> So construction is like $2 trillion
industry. Excavators might be some like
it's like 100 billion.
>> Yeah. So the way I think about it is
that there's um one and a quarter
billion hours of operator time operating
these heavy machines just in the US. So
one and a quarter billion hours a year.
>> Wow. that's massively constrained
because there's giant amounts of jobs
that just don't pencil out and everybody
has shortages and every general
contractor we talked to is turning down
work that they can't handle and so and
that's just one foundation. There was a
study we saw that there's something like
$120 billion of excavation contracts per
year in the US. Now this is everything
right like but um uh and excavators
we're seeing are often times like 25 30%
of fleets and so the the fact that you
can isolate the product side is a huge
value ad uh safety you have a very
slowmoving semic-controlled environment
so the interactions that are at the core
of the complexity for qualifying a
vehicle on a public road you now can
actually um uh have a much more
controlled problem that for a variety of
reasons we actually can chop off a giant
percentage of the complexity of of
safety and the hundreds of millions of
dollars it would take to reinvent a
vehicle platform for public road safe
driving. Um, these machines are actually
beautifully designed to where we can
upfit retrofit existing machines and go
to market without a vehicle. So you
could take like something like a
Caterpillar machine or whatever and just
like put stuff on it and go
>> sensors, compute and now uh the machine
becomes uh autonomously capable for the
situations it's quered for that service
area increases through software updates
over time and it can still be manually
operated and the product becomes the
digital operator and the driver of um uh
of these machines and all the services
that you can kind of get beyond it. And
um and so there you can actually start
to um you know gradually get that beach
head and then you use this flywheel to
add new capabilities, demolition,
material handling, other more kind of
more nuance tasks, uh new machines like
wheel loaders, motorgraders, compactors,
new types of work. Um and you start that
expansion, but you can start start
getting a really genuine business from
the very beginning.
>> Tell us about some of the problems with
excavating. I'm just curious like what's
the tech stack look like for when you're
when you're digging? It's going to have
different types of ground. Does it learn
over time about the ground from looking
at it from from digging it? Like does
can you tell what's going to happen?
Like does experienced operator know,
watch out, this is going to slip and you
have to learn that too. Like how does it
work?
>> So there's maybe like two really big
buckets of things that are super uh
different and challenging about this. So
one is the fact that you're like
manipulating the world and you have
these like interesting weird dynamics.
The second is the interface on how you
actually define it. So on the first one
uh you're totally right. There's this
physics where you're cutting through
earth. Clay is different than different
types of soil. You have rocks, you have
like pipes, you have all these different
things.
>> Yeah, if you screw up, you're just going
to fall into it probably.
>> So, you could there's actually some
pretty bad things that can happen. And
so, that's actually like pretty
modelable. You can like you see the
terrain model of everything. You can
model the physics, what safe
orientations you can be on. The harder
part is probably what is inside the
earth and how do you actually kind of
>> the pipe being there that you destroy,
>> the pipe, the rock, how do you not fight
against it? How do you not cut fiber to
DFW? Right? Like so apparently that's
like uh somebody told us it's like uh a
million dollars every few minutes you
cut that line or something something
don't cut that line.
>> Don't cut that line. So there's like
they'll have a guy to just make sure you
don't cut that line. So um
>> anyways so there's stuff like that. But
um when you think about the interaction
of the soil modeling problem, what's
interesting here is that you can treat
like the broader problem as like a giant
scale imitation learning problem where
like you're learning from expert kind of
demonstration and you're learning the
nuances of how do you interpret this
like kitchen sink of everything that's
happening through massive scale data and
picking up these nuances of how does
this actually how would how would you
actually navigate these challenges? um
very similar to how a you know in a way
we can kind of learn from human
demonstration how you navigate the
kitchen sink of stuff that's out that's
on a public road and so in some ways the
fight against the earth and and
everything there's an element of that
that you just directly learn because you
see how people react to it and the
sensor data you're collecting is not
just the data from the top of the
machine where actually seeing all the
signals inside the machine that um give
you kind of the pressure gauges the like
um IMUs the resistance you you feel that
resistance and the fact that you're not
moving as much as you could and so um
you can tackle it through directly
learning. There's also a lot of things
that we're thinking about in simulation
where we actually have simulations that
model kind of like different earth
densities and over time you can actually
even think about modeling kind of huge
diversities of properties of earth and
just making sure that you're
sufficiently able to navigate.
>> Yeah. I mean could you could say there's
resistance here there's resistance here.
Oh, we found a large rock that's
underground here that you actually have
to change your strategy to remove this.
>> That's right. change your strategy, you
change your pressure, you do all these
things. And um uh and so you can treat
it as a reinforcement learning problem
to some degrees. And so there's a lot
all sorts of interesting ways to kind of
like isolate this out where um the
interesting things about these physics
problems is you don't even have to like
perfectly model the Earth. You just want
to be able to throw a diversity of
circumstances and be able to kind of
like test out your system. Uh there's
also um you know frankly uh you kind of
have a um you have this ability where
it's it's not like a life or death thing
where you can go and you can kind of
like work through it and try to kind of
like figure it out and and push your way
through.
>> So because it's not life or death, you
can iterate a lot more.
>> You can iterate a lot more. It can take
you a little bit longer to deal with
like some some tough challenge. You can
even get remote assistance if you like
really need it. you have a lot more
flexibility on how you tackle these
problems where it's not this like sparse
situation where everything's fine and
then suddenly you've heard you you have
an accident, right?
>> That's that's great because we talk
about man machine symbiosis as this
thing we keep coming back to which is
you know the 1960s framework. People do
what they're good at, machines do what
they're good at. This is a lot easier
way to work together basically.
>> That's right. And these are meant to
spice into existing fleets. And so you
uh and so maybe this thing starts as
like a excavator doing heavy digging t
digging tasks as part of a crew doing a
heavy civil project in Texas. Um and
then as uh as this progresses um you
start to go to more capabilities and
more machines and you you you still have
huge amounts of work that has to be kind
of like partnered and done. Um and in
fact it's expansionary because you're
actually creating jobs that wouldn't be
done otherwise but you have an ability
to kind of move higher and higher level
and create almost like a operating
system for a general contractor to
define the work they want by the goal
versus micromanaging the machines.
>> I want to go to the expansionary nature
but let's dig into the tech one time
first. We talking bunch about this. Most
of our audience is not super technical.
Some of them are. Let's just go a little
more complicated here. Like like what
are the actual AI breakthroughs allowing
this like what are you using? What type
of talent does it require? Like what
does that look like in the tech stack?
>> Yeah, absolutely. So um fundamentally uh
when you think about the tech stack,
it's this like big chain that goes from
um the hardware to system architecture
of how to integrate on the machine, get
the right coverage for safety purposes
and everything else you need. uh spice
into the machine itself and be able to
kind of like read the signal and control
it. So there's a lot of like hardware
and system architecture elements.
There's infrastructure, the operating
system
>> that's actually controlling the machine
actually going
>> yeah the feedback back and forth. Uh how
do you like pass through data and then
create your own signal that basically
you know we'll dive a little bit more
detail there. Um there's uh controls
there's a large scale kind of like model
in the middle that is effectively the
autonomy stack right and the autonomy
system.
>> So you're creating models of all sorts
of things there. Yeah. So, so in this
you can think of this as almost like
this giant model that takes as an input
everything from the camera light. So
there's cameras, lightars, IMUs, GPS's
uh uh like tons of signals from the
machine itself and you're uh and it
controls itself from the human uh in a
lot of cases where you're using that for
training and then you're piping that in
uh and you're also giving it a goal of
what you want the world to look like.
Maybe it's the shape of a trench or a
foundation that you're digging. Um and
the model is actually interpreting all
of this and extrapolating out to a
trajectory of what it should do. And you
can here's what you do to get to this
part of get this result.
>> That's right. And so and you can think
of and it's a complicated model. It's
not just like one giant system. You can
think of like embeddings for the vision
uh components that you can borrow from
open source LMS that already have
captured kind of like what are the
embeddings that are like very powerful
for uh for you know cameras or LAR. You
can um uh so you can do a whole bunch of
kind of like subtraining of these
systems. But at the end of the day what
you're doing is you're trying to like
replicate and predict what what a person
would do. And so that output is like a
highdimensional trajectory of what the
body plus the bucket might need to do um
in this machine.
>> It's kind of funny because it reminds me
of discussing like alpha go and alpha
chess and stuff where you model it and
you go I there's no equivalent of like
move 37 and alpha go where you just do
something shocking. There's there's not
going to be anything subtlety of like
interpreting the patterns and the
nuances and again in our case across
tens of thousands of hours or hundreds
of thousands of hours of data you start
to pick up these patterns of how do you
go manipulate the world to get it to
where you need to go. And um and what's
beautiful about it is that you don't
even like this is not a problem where
you could engineer a solution through
rules and huristics. You have to have
this sort of modern approach which even
5 years ago or seven years ago wouldn't
have been really you know possible and
today that's actually the only way to
solve these sort of problems. And so you
have this like big model that
effectively is learning and then
outputting this trajectory. And um and
the way to think about it is almost not
too different from how a LOM has this
like giant context and you you know
giant foundation. You give it some
context and it spits out a sequence of
words. Here it's it's somewhat similar
except the sequence is not words. It's
actually action space of you know this
machine. Um, and what's nice is that
that architecture, it doesn't matter
whether you have a excavator doing
digging or demolition or a wheel loader
or a compactor or an agriculture machine
like the um the foundations of that
architecture, the hardware carries over,
the safety system carries over,
everything carries over and then
>> so it's a little bit like an LLM, but
instead of instead of letters or words,
you're actually modeling it based on
real world things.
>> The trajectory. Yes. So, it's like a
high dimensional trajectory for um, you
know, bucket and body and then you can
do inverse kinematics to actually figure
out what you uh how you actually execute
that that world. And so you're um you
know so you're effectively if you think
of the modularity of it um and then you
obviously have a huge amount of
infrastructure for like the cloud
component for training managing these
machines and everything else that's like
very complicated and very important in
this whole system and then simulation
stack and everything that you do for
offline development. But um you're
effectively um creating this onboard
system that is ingesting all of this
data. Um the system splicing into these
machines where we can basically now take
existing machinery in a way that's
totally reversible. It's noninvasive and
and in less than four hours we can take
a machine and upfit it to be you know to
have the system on it. Um now you're
able to actually um you know take that
input and give it you know give a real
intention and uh and then a lot of the
interesting challenge becomes on how do
you get the data to cap you know to
really train that signal and how do you
actually interface with it? How do you
set the intent in a way that's human
understandable?
>> I remember one time we were talking
about this. You people are measured by
their years of experience. There's
equivalent of like a level five year
year or 10 year like person. Maybe
someone gets to a 10ear level sooner
than or some some of them. But so so
what are what's the computer at now and
what's it supposed to be going towards?
>> Yeah, good question. So the the
interesting thing is for so for humans
like excavators are one of the toughest
machines. That's why it's like very high
dimensional. there's like seven degrees
of freedom and like you know you have
all these subtle controls on the bucket,
the body, the treads. Um so it's a lot
harder to learn than a car or truck to
to drive and so we've heard that often
times it takes like four to five years
to get really really good at this. Um
>> and obviously you can get decent early
on. We're in the early stages of
learning these capabilities, but it's
moving quickly. Um and we can jump
through these learnings astronomically
quicker in time than a human can. a lot
of it is actually based on the right
structures of kind of like data and and
the you know the way you you you
leverage it. Um and so the way we think
about this is unlike a human which kind
of brings up their competency uniformly
and they're kind of a somewhat okay
operator in everything um and then
gradually kind of like build their way
up. um we're collecting data on a wide
range of tasks, but um what we really
want to do is to get incredibly
competent at uh particular deep areas
>> to be the very best at a very specific
thing that that there maybe there's $30
billion of that to do in the economy.
>> Totally. Exactly. So, for example, just
like heavy earth work where you're like
loading dump trucks or trenching or
digging or art scale like you know a
factory where you have to like we're
we're collecting we're working right now
in a factory where um you're you have to
move 600,000 cubic yards of earth to
build a a paper factory.
>> This sounds terrible. It's basically for
several months in a row this on this
like multi-acre site just scoop the dirt
loaded. Scoop the dirt loaded literally
for months on end.
>> Months like Yeah. Like 12 hours a day,
seven days a week. uh in the case of
these sort of projects in Texas and
Arizona, they have to stop working in
the heat, um there's just like all these
like fundamental challenges and this is
the part of the project that actually
has like the most variance. Um, and so
when you have like general contractors
bidding on uh, you know, a project for
Department of Transportation in Texas or
Arizona or something like that, they're
they're bidding, they're winning the
project by maybe like 1% and uh, the
contingencies are are very heavy on like
kind of the earth portion of, you know,
a lot of these like kind of projects
like this or factories and um, and you
have problems like variances in talent,
um, attrition, uh, you know, like like
external elements like heat um, and This
is the sort of thing that can make or
break whether you make a profit on a
project.
>> I want to talk about now like the bigger
picture here, which I think is a fun
one. So, of course, there's a lot of
lites letting up to attack this. A lot
of trolls who want to demonize what's
going on here. They're going to I think
I posted uh something about autonomous
construction previously that I mentioned
before and I think the head of some
California labor union tried to like use
it to attack me and say I was a bad
person. Uh, you know, I obviously
believe that this is going to ultimately
create a lot more jobs. I believe it's
going to bring prices down. I believe
it's going to help our crumbling
infrastructure. Uh so I mean this is
just to me it's obviously good but a lot
of people aren't going to understand
that. People are not very good systems
thinkers. They assume you're just
destroying jobs. Like how do you think
about it? How do you explain this to
people about why it's good?
>> So this is not a zero sum game. Uh
there's an astronomical demand for
projects for uh just given all the
trends we're seeing the data centers
that need to be built, the housing
that's too expensive, the roads that are
in a refresh cycle. Uh there's just not
enough people to do this work and it's
actually getting a lot worse, like a lot
worse. Uh, and this is the number like
number one problem that we're hearing in
the industry from almost everybody we
talked to. And every single GC we've
talked to has more jobs that they could
take on that they just like physically
can't. And so when that happens, market
forces come into play. You have prices
that skyrocket. You have projects that
just simply don't get done. The things
that absolutely have to happen get done
but get get done for much higher cost.
That cost gets burdened by companies, by
consumers, by governments, which in the
end goes to taxpayers. Uh, and all of
this kind of perpetuates. Um and uh and
we've heard of literally multi-billion
dollar projects that got approved and
funded but don't get off the ground
because they don't pencil out, meaning
you just cannot do them profitably. And
so when you think of something like the
heavy machinery work that happens up
front in a project, um that might be
it's actually a very painful, expensive
and unpredictable phase of it. But what
it does is if it it can change the
entire physics of how that project can
be um priced out where for example it
could be done two months faster because
that part is running 24/7 and instead of
8 months it's 6 months. So now the
developer that funded that project and
has to pay 9% interest on a $400 million
loan um has a completely different unit
economics on the project. So they'll
invest in more projects. The
construction crew now there's more
projects to be funded. there's way more
work that starts getting created for all
the other construction work that exists,
the materials that need to be, you know,
uh, sourced, um, the building itself,
the materials, and so you have this like
massively expansionary element of the
economy now that powers every single
other part of our GDP because
construction is the foundation layer of
almost everything we do. Um, and in the
end, it's like almost almost any big
wave like industrial revolution or
computers or internet. Um it's very easy
to identify a few of the local things
that maybe very directly get impacted
but the elasticity of supply demand that
now gets unlocked. The volume gets
astronomically larger. the salaries
actually get bigger because there's more
at stake and
>> you mean each each person could do more
now hugely more because um you know
you're now having like a 1 to end sort
of ratio or people are moving to the
hardest parts of the job and the parts
that are like um that are massive volume
but actually like very ripe for
automation get taken care of and now
everything kind of like lines up in a
better way. One of my uh mentors I was
lucky to have was Milton Freeman. And
one of my favorite stories of him you've
probably heard is he goes to China and
in the giant Chinese construction
projects, they have thousands of people
with shovels and and they're digging
things. And he says, you know, there's
like this modern machinery that could do
this so much more efficiently and you'd
get so much more done. And the Chinese
leader says, well, if we did that, then
we wouldn't have as many jobs to give
all of our people. And he says, "Oh, I
see. So how about you have them only use
spoons instead of shovels? you can have
many many more jobs because the spoons
would be so much slower. And this and
there's like this like economic
intuition that a lot of people just
don't have. The communists in
particular, by the way, didn't have and
and they do now, I think, but they did
not have that before. There's now
communists in America who also don't
have this intuition. But but but it it
is fascinating to me because it because
you there will be better infrastructure.
There will be more construction
projects. There will be less taxpayer
dollars going towards it. So the more
dollars for other things, right? It
seems it seems so obvious on one hand
and yet you're going to get attacked by
this. Um I don't know if you're
following at all. There's a lot of
different people trying to pass laws
making AI harder. I is this something I
guess you guys are going to have to to
fight against, huh?
>> You know, and we saw the same thing at
Whimo, right? So it's um you know,
there's a lot of um challenges and
friction. you kind of push through on
something that just feels inevitable
like you can't you you you squint and
you fast forward 20 30 years and you're
like do you think that we will go and
like you know harvest fruit the same way
or um you know build buildings some way
it just feels like the I mean everything
just grinds to a halt because like the
age demographics just don't work uh um
uh if that if that's the case and we're
just fundamentally holding back the
economy so I think you know it holding
back autonomy in the end it will like go
back and look like holding back the you
know industrial revolution or the tools
that help farming be more efficient you
know 100 years ago um uh in this case I
think there's um a very understandable
fear because of just the pace of
innovation that's happening and the
unknowns behind it um I think there were
elements of this with the internet as
well but maybe this is like a little bit
faster and more pronounced um I think
for you know for us um we're uh uh we're
able to the advantage that we you know
we kind of have is that we actually can
be very intentional on partnering in
parts of the country and sectors and
companies that are really excited to
embrace this and see the benefits of it
and they become kind of the test cases
that um that end up you know being uh
really visible and I just hope that
other states um see this and they like
actually pick it up because you can't
hold this back at the end of the day
it's like there's an inevitability to it
and the entire country will benefit
from it. Um, and instead of the local
fear of change, ideally the energy goes
towards how do you really facilitate
these evolutions to where you do protect
maybe pockets of industries and people
that are more adversely impacted, but
the net production is of of GDP and jobs
is just so massive that the
opportunities are there. And that's
where the energy should go on how do you
make these transitions very humane and
and smooth.
>> There's going to be things protected
from automation for a while. We saw that
with the ports which whatever you think
of that they're protected for now.
>> I don't necessarily agree but I respect
it. Uh but I am proud of Texas I think
is one my home state where you're you're
doing a lot
>> facility outside of Austin that's uh
going to be a really huge hub for us
>> and you know for me I I you know I tend
to think we are on the cusp of not only
an advanced manufacturing revolution
that brings back a huge amount of
activity to us but also robotics
revolution that's coming. I think is is
is what you're doing related closely to
robotics? It's a form of robotics in a
way isn't it? It's definitely a form of
robotics where we're automating physical
behavior, right, and action. Um it's
just a physical manifestation of the AI
wave that's kind of happening um all
over where um we've all seen it on the
you know chatbot side, LM side with uh
chat GBT and everything else. Um uh
obviously we're seeing it in
transportation with Whimo. It is
absolutely inevitable that that starts
to hit manufacturing, construction and
these other industries. Um and in a lot
of ways it's actually I'm to me it's
even more exciting because uh like 80
85% of our GDP is physical industries.
It's the physical world and so there's
only so much you can do with like more
intelligent data movement but uh at the
end of the day we have to build things.
We have to harvest things. We have to
produce things and um
>> it's a real economy.
I mean, we love our digital side, too,
but like, yeah, it's the it's the the
there's there's something both like
beautiful about the, you know, just
gigantic potential of all this and the
physicality of it, but there's just a
practicality that what transforms the
economy, a big portion of it is
building. It's the building things,
manufacturing things.
>> Well, it's going to be so cool if we
could all afford to build like much
bigger, much cooler things really,
really, really inexpensively. You're
going to have people be able to design
stuff no one's thought oft
you're Boris you're on the cutting edge
of AI in robotics you're seeing all the
new possibilities what are the most
exciting things coming in the physical
world to you like what's what's really
what's really cool that's coming up
>> interesting in the physical world so um
one of the interesting things there's
enablers of the physical world where
like hardware is way more accessible
than ever before so in our case we're
heavily leveraging the automotive
ecosystem where every car company is
going to have a level two level three
solution in the next 3 four So the price
of cameras, the price of compute, like
Nvidia's next chips, they're all kind of
like going down in cost because they're
going to be boosted by millions of units
of production exactly the same way that
the smartphone completely revolutionized
the price points of all of its
components. And so that's a pretty
massive enabler where suddenly um you
know, Whimo invented incredible sensors,
compute, LAR, everything because it kind
of had to 15 years ago that just the
ecosystem wasn't there. Um today uh
we're able to leverage all that and so
that's like a giant enabler of um uh of
all of these systems. Um what's um
what's also interesting is that um you
know you start like the production of a
lot of the systems out there. starting
already to be designed to be digitally
friendly where the APIs are starting to
be there to interface with machines um
in these sort of sectors um uh or to be
able to extract a data feed from
infrastructure for a new building or for
a new city that's kind of getting built.
So you can take something conceptually
help you figure it out and you can
automatically have
>> Yeah. And the moment you have data, you
turn it into an AI problem where
fundamentally that's at the root of
everything where if you have enough data
to actually structure uh an ML problem
around it, you can capture incredible
signals and actually kind of do pretty
magical things. And so digitizing the
physical world is probably one of the
most exciting things about the physical
world.
>> Well, speaking of magical things, I have
a young daughter who's very into art and
architecture. And I've told her that if
she really studies architecture hard and
we design a really cool castle together,
I'll help her build it in the real
world. So, I hope you can help me build
this thing with your
>> Yes, it'll be amazing. And uh um the the
biggest castle we can possibly build.
And uh and the cool thing is is just
like the you know thinking about like
the architecture side of all this like
one of the interesting challenges that's
really novel here is what's the
interface to these sort of systems? How
do you define the goal and the precision
and the requirements and how do you
change it on the fly and mix these
modalities from digital to verbal to you
know gestures and cues. And so there's
like a really exciting kind of like
world ahead where these are not systems
are going to be operating on their own.
It's going to be tools that just enable
people to build beautiful things faster
um quicker like better more accurately
and cheaper than ever before.
>> Well I think you're definitely working
towards creating a more beautiful and
more affordable future and I really
appreciate the work you're doing.
>> Thank you John. really really appreciate
it. It's a yeah honor to uh to be able
to join and talk about it.